# DC Extended Universe

The DC Extended Universe (DCEU) is an American media franchise and shared universe centered on a series of superhero films and a television series produced by DC Studios and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It is based on characters that appear in American comic books published by DC Comics. The DCEU also includes comic books, short films, novels, and video games. Like the original DC Universe in comic books, the DCEU is established by crossing over common plot elements, settings, cast, and characters.

Warner Bros. began trying to bring various DC Comics superheroes together in films in 2002, when Wolfgang Petersen was to direct a crossover of the Superman and Batman film franchises. A planned Justice League film was put on hold in 2008. Initial universe plans were scrapped after the critical and commercial disappointment of the 2011 film Green Lantern.

Warner Bros. finally established its shared universe with the 2013 film Man of Steel, a reboot of the Superman film series, and 2016's Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, which also served as a reboot of the Batman film series. This was followed by 13 films and Peacemaker, a television series for Max. The DCEU's 15th and final film, Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom, was released on December 22, 2023.

The DCEU is the eighth-highest-grossing film franchise and the fourth-highest-grossing superhero film franchise, having grossed more than $7 billion at the global box office. The highest-grossing DC Comics-based film is Aquaman (2018), which earned more than $1.15 billion worldwide. However, nine of the 15 theatrically released films failed to break even theatrically, being considered box-office bombs. Reception to the franchise was generally mixed among critics and fans.

A new, rebooted franchise of films and television series, DC Universe (DCU), is planned by James Gunn and Peter Safran, who were appointed DC Studios' co-chairmen and co-CEOs in a late-2022 restructuring. Certain DCEU characters, such as Peacemaker, Amanda Waller and Blue Beetle, will be transitioned to the DCU.

## Etymology

Upon announcement of the film series, the universe was commonly called the "DC Cinematic Universe" (DCCU) by fans and the media, in keeping with the naming convention of the already established Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). Keith Staskiewicz, writing for Entertainment Weekly, jokingly coined the term "DC Extended Universe" (DCEU) in an article about Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice on July 1, 2015. This term and the abbreviation DCEU quickly spread among the press and fans who took it as the official name of the franchise over the following years. According to Vulture writer Abraham Riesman, DC confirmed to him in September 2017 that the term was not used internally and they did not consider it official.

In 2016, as part of DC Films Presents: Dawn of the Justice League, both Geoff Johns and Kevin Smith referred to the franchise's name as being the "Justice League Universe". During the DC Films panel at San Diego Comic-Con 2018, a video banner displayed the words "Welcome to the Worlds of DC", after showcasing some upcoming films. As a result, some media outlets interpreted this as DC officially naming their shared film universe as the "Worlds of DC". However, in March 2020, Jim Lee referred to the franchise as the DC Extended Universe at C2E2. The franchise was officially titled DC Extended Universe when the WarnerMedia streaming service HBO Max launched the following May.

Following the appointment of Peter Safran and James Gunn as heads of DC Studios, Warner Bros. Discovery (created from the merger between WarnerMedia and Discovery, Inc.) referred to DC's film and television series as part of the "DC Universe" (DCU), which some media outlets interpreted as a rebranding of the DCEU.

## Development and history

In 2002, Wolfgang Petersen was set to direct a Batman vs. Superman film from a script by Akiva Goldsman, but the project was shelved by Warner Bros. to focus on individual Superman and Batman projects. In 2008, a planned Justice League film directed by George Miller and titled Justice League: Mortal was placed on indefinite hold after it failed to secure tax breaks for filming in Australia. Man of Steel, a reboot of the Superman film series released in 2013, was intended to launch a shared universe if successful. Following the film's release, Warner Bros. announced a follow-up entitled Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), establishing the DCEU. A slate of 11 DCEU films were then announced in 2014.

In 2016, Warner Bros. established DC Films after Batman v Superman did not meet Warner Bros.' box office expectations and received negative responses from fans and critics for its dark tone. The division, led by Geoff Johns and Jon Berg, was to oversee production and form a cohesive creative direction for the DCEU. After the failure of Justice League (2017), Johns and Berg were replaced by Walter Hamada in 2018. The DCEU expanded to television with the release of Peacemaker (2022–present) on HBO Max.

Discovery Inc. completed its acquisition of DC and Warner Bros. parent company WarnerMedia in 2022, forming a new company named Warner Bros. Discovery (WBD) with David Zaslav as CEO. Zaslav sought to overhaul the DCEU, and began searching for a creative leader akin to Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige to lead DC's film and television projects. James Gunn and Peter Safran were subsequently announced as the co-chairmen and CEOs of DC Studios, the successor to DC Films. In 2023, the duo unveiled their slate of ten DC projects which were to be part of the DC Universe (DCU), a soft reboot and spiritual successor to the DCEU.

## Films

Films of the DC Extended Universe :

| Film | U.S. release date | Director | Screenwriter(s) | Story by | Producer(s) |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Man of Steel | June 14, 2013 (2013-06-14) | Zack Snyder | David S. Goyer | David S. Goyer & Christopher Nolan | Charles Roven, Christopher Nolan, Emma Thomas, and Deborah Snyder |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice | March 25, 2016 (2016-03-25) | Zack Snyder | Chris Terrio and David S. Goyer | Chris Terrio and David S. Goyer | Charles Roven and Deborah Snyder |
| Suicide Squad | August 5, 2016 (2016-08-05) | David Ayer | David Ayer | David Ayer | Charles Roven and Richard Suckle |
| Wonder Woman | June 2, 2017 (2017-06-02) | Patty Jenkins | Allan Heinberg | Zack Snyder & Allan Heinberg and Jason Fuchs | Charles Roven, Deborah Snyder, Zack Snyder, and Richard Suckle |
| Justice League | November 17, 2017 (2017-11-17) | Zack Snyder | Chris Terrio and Joss Whedon | Chris Terrio & Zack Snyder | Charles Roven, Deborah Snyder, Jon Berg, and Geoff Johns |
| Aquaman | December 21, 2018 (2018-12-21) | James Wan | David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick and Will Beall | Geoff Johns & James Wan and Will Beall | Peter Safran and Rob Cowan |
| Shazam! | April 5, 2019 (2019-04-05) | David F. Sandberg | Henry Gayden | Henry Gayden and Darren Lemke | Peter Safran |
| Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn) | February 7, 2020 (2020-02-07) | Cathy Yan | Christina Hodson | Christina Hodson | Margot Robbie, Bryan Unkeless, and Sue Kroll |
| Wonder Woman 1984 | December 25, 2020 (2020-12-25) | Patty Jenkins | Patty Jenkins & Geoff Johns & Dave Callaham | Patty Jenkins & Geoff Johns | Charles Roven, Deborah Snyder, Zack Snyder, Patty Jenkins, Gal Gadot, and Stephen Jones |
| Zack Snyder's Justice League | March 18, 2021 (2021-03-18) | Zack Snyder | Chris Terrio | Chris Terrio & Zack Snyder and Will Beall | Charles Roven and Deborah Snyder |
| The Suicide Squad | August 5, 2021 (2021-08-05) | James Gunn | James Gunn | James Gunn | Charles Roven and Peter Safran |
| Black Adam | October 21, 2022 (2022-10-21) | Jaume Collet-Serra | Adam Sztykiel and Rory Haines & Sohrab Noshirvani | Adam Sztykiel and Rory Haines & Sohrab Noshirvani | Beau Flynn, Hiram Garcia, Dwayne Johnson, and Dany Garcia |
| Shazam! Fury of the Gods | March 17, 2023 (2023-03-17) | David F. Sandberg | Henry Gayden and Chris Morgan | Henry Gayden and Chris Morgan | Peter Safran |
| The Flash | June 16, 2023 (2023-06-16) | Andy Muschietti | Christina Hodson | John Francis Daley & Jonathan Goldstein and Joby Harold | Barbara Muschietti and Michael Disco |
| Blue Beetle | August 18, 2023 (2023-08-18) | Angel Manuel Soto | Gareth Dunnet-Alcocer | Gareth Dunnet-Alcocer | John Rickard and Zev Foreman |
| Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom | December 22, 2023 (2023-12-22) | James Wan | David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick | James Wan & David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick and Jason Momoa & Thomas Pa'a Sibbett | Peter Safran, James Wan, and Rob Cowan |

### Man of Steel (2013)

Kal-El / Clark Kent, who arrived on Earth years ago as an infant from Krypton, struggles with why he was sent to Earth. Raised by his adoptive parents, Jonathan and Martha Kent, Clark adopts the persona "Superman", and learns if his abilities are meant to maintain peace or conquer the world.

During story discussions for The Dark Knight Rises (2012), David S. Goyer told Christopher Nolan his idea regarding how to present Superman in a modern context. Impressed with Goyer's concept, Nolan pitched the idea to the studio, who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write based on the financial and critical success of The Dark Knight (2008). In October 2010, Zack Snyder was hired to direct the film, and Henry Cavill was cast as Clark Kent / Superman in January 2011. Principal photography began in August 2011. Man of Steel was released in North America on June 14, 2013.

### Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016)

Gotham City-based vigilante Batman travels to Metropolis to preemptively combat Superman, fearing what would happen if the latter is kept unchecked, while another threat endangers humankind.

By June 2013, Warner Bros. were fast-tracking a sequel to Man of Steel, with Snyder and Goyer returning as director and writer, respectively. Nolan was involved in an advisory role as executive producer. The sequel included Batman in a main role, and serves as a reboot of the Batman film series. Cavill, Amy Adams, Diane Lane, and Laurence Fishburne reprised their Man of Steel roles, while Ben Affleck was cast as Bruce Wayne / Batman. Chris Terrio was hired to rewrite Goyer's script. Originally scheduled to be released in July 2015, the release date was changed to May 6, 2016, to give the filmmakers "time to realize fully their vision, given the complex visual nature of the story". The film's title was revealed to be Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Initial filming occurred on October 19, 2013, at East Los Angeles College, before full principal photography began in May 2014 and concluded that December. Production took place in Detroit, Illinois, New Mexico, Africa and the South Pacific. After another date change, the film was released in North America on March 25, 2016.

Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice is set 18 months after the events of Man of Steel. The film introduces Gal Gadot as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman, Ezra Miller as Barry Allen / The Flash, Jason Momoa as Arthur Curry / Aquaman, Ray Fisher as Victor Stone / Cyborg, and Joe Morton as Dr. Silas Stone. Steppenwolf, who serves as the main antagonist in Justice League (2017), was introduced through a brief scene not included in the film's theatrical release but instead revealed online by Warner Bros. on March 28, before being included in the Ultimate Edition home video release.

### Suicide Squad (2016)

After Superman's death, a secret government agency recruits imprisoned supervillains to execute dangerous black ops missions and rescue the world from a powerful threat, in exchange for clemency.

In February 2009, prior to the development of the DCEU, Warner Bros. was developing a Suicide Squad film, with Dan Lin producing and Justin Marks writing the script. Warner Bros. announced Suicide Squad in October 2014, with David Ayer as director, also serving as screenwriter. The main cast included Will Smith, Margot Robbie, Jared Leto, Jai Courtney, Jay Hernandez, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Karen Fukuhara, Cara Delevingne, Viola Davis, and Joel Kinnaman. Principal photography took place from April to August 2015 in Toronto. Suicide Squad was released in North America on August 5, 2016.

Suicide Squad is set after the events of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Affleck and Miller reprise their roles as Bruce Wayne / Batman and Barry Allen / The Flash from that film. In a mid-credits scene, Amanda Waller (portrayed by Davis) meets Wayne in a restaurant and hands him a dossier containing information on future members of the Justice League.

### Wonder Woman (2017)

Diana of Themyscira, an Amazon warrior who is also the demigoddess daughter of the god Zeus, uses her talents and abilities to help humanity during World War I.

In December 2013, Gal Gadot was cast as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman and signed a three-picture deal which included a solo film. The film was announced in October 2014, and Michelle MacLaren was confirmed to direct from a screenplay by Jason Fuchs the next month. MacLaren left the project the following year in April due to creative differences, and Patty Jenkins was hired to replace her. Filming occurred from November 2015 to May 2016 and took place in the United Kingdom, France and Italy. Wonder Woman was released in North America on June 2, 2017.

### Justice League (2017)

Motivated by Superman's death at the hands of Doomsday, Batman and Wonder Woman assemble a team of metahumans to stop the threat of Steppenwolf, who is in search of three Mother Boxes scattered across Earth.

By June 2013, Goyer was set to write Justice League as part of a three-film deal he signed for Man of Steel. Snyder was confirmed to return as director in April 2014, and the film was announced in October as Justice League Part One. In 2016, Chris Terrio was revealed to have written the script, and the title was changed to simply Justice League by June. Affleck, Cavill, Gadot, Momoa, Miller, and Fisher reprised their respective roles from previous films. Filming took place from April to October 2016 at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in England, as well as locations around London and in Iceland. In May 2017, Snyder stepped down from his duties on the film due to his daughter's death; Joss Whedon filled his position on post-production, with additional scenes being written and directed by him. Though Whedon was not officially credited for his role as post-production director, he completed enough additional work for a screenwriting credit on the film. Justice League was released worldwide on November 17, 2017.

Reprising their roles from previous films are Jeremy Irons as Alfred Pennyworth, Diane Lane as Martha Kent, Amy Adams as Lois Lane, Jesse Eisenberg as Lex Luthor, Connie Nielsen as Hippolyta, Robin Wright as Antiope, and Joe Morton as Silas Stone. Justice League also introduces J. K. Simmons as James Gordon, Amber Heard as Mera, and Billy Crudup as Henry Allen, with Joe Manganiello appearing as Slade Wilson / Deathstroke in a post-credits scene.

**Zack Snyder's Justice League (2021)**

The divisive reaction to the theatrical cut of Justice League, with Snyder leaving directorial duties and the final cut of the film in the hands of Whedon, led to a fan-driven campaign for a "Snyder Cut" of the film. Arguments were made that Snyder's vision would be more cohesive to the previous films. In March 2019, Snyder confirmed his original cut does exist, and stated that it was up to Warner Bros. to release it. Warner Bros. remained silent regarding the matter, though Variety reported in November that Warner Bros. was unlikely to release Snyder's version of Justice League, with one studio insider describing it as "a pipe dream". Snyder announced in May 2020 that HBO Max would be releasing his cut of Justice League on their service on March 18, 2021. Initially conceived as a four-part miniseries, it was ultimately released as a four-hour film, twice the length of the theatrical version. Snyder stated this version is intended to not affect the future of the DCEU continuity, but that it takes place in a slightly alternate universe. The new cut cost an estimated $70 million to complete, primarily for visual effects and additional photography. Some actors returned to their roles for the additional photography. Work on the cut was completed in January 2021.

Characters in the film who did not appear in the theatrical version include the Joker (with Jared Leto reprising the role from Suicide Squad), General Swanwick / Martian Manhunter (with Harry Lennix reprising the role from Man of Steel and Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice), Darkseid (portrayed by Ray Porter), DeSaad (portrayed by Peter Guinness), Nuidis Vulko (portrayed by Willem Dafoe), Iris West (portrayed by Kiersey Clemons), Ryan Choi (portrayed by Zheng Kai), a Green Lantern, as well as Granny Goodness.

### Aquaman (2018)

Arthur Curry, a half-Atlantean assistant lighthouse keeper, sets out to lead the underwater kingdom of Atlantis against his half-brother, King Orm, who seeks to unite the seven underwater kingdoms against the surface world.

Jason Momoa was cast as Arthur Curry / Aquaman in June 2014. By August, Will Beall and Kurt Johnstad were writing competing scripts for the character's solo film. Aquaman was announced in October. James Wan was hired as director the following year, as well as to oversee the screenplay by Johnstad. David Leslie Johnson was later brought to write a new script. Beall returned to write the script, based on a story treatment by Wan and Geoff Johns. Johnson worked on a rewrite of Beall's script with Wan and producer Peter Safran. Principal photography began in May 2017 in Queensland, Australia and wrapped that October. Aquaman was released in North America on December 21, 2018.

Aquaman is set after the events of Justice League, though critics have noticed numerous inconsistencies between the two theatrically released films. Furthermore, Momoa claimed that the film takes place after "Zack's cut", with the ending of that version of the film directly tying into the events of Aquaman. Heard reprises her role as Mera from Justice League, while Dafoe is introduced as Nuidis Vulko.

### Shazam! (2019)

By speaking "Shazam", Billy Batson, a 14-year-old foster child, can turn into an adult superhero, courtesy of an ancient wizard. He attempts to master his powers and defeat the evil forces controlled by Dr. Thaddeus Sivana.

In August 2014, Dwayne Johnson announced his attachment to a project about the superhero Shazam, formerly known as Captain Marvel. Johnson was revealed to be portraying the antihero Black Adam, Shazam's nemesis in the film, with Darren Lemke set to write the script in September. In October, Warner Bros. announced Shazam as a film in its upcoming slate. By January 2017, Henry Gayden was working on the script. In July, David F. Sandberg was hired to direct Shazam!. Johnson was dropped from the project, instead starring in a Black Adam solo film. By October, Zachary Levi was cast as Shazam, and in November, Asher Angel was cast as Shazam's child-age alter ego, Billy Batson. Principal photography began in January 2018 and wrapped that May, with most of the filming taking place at Pinewood Toronto Studios, among other locations around Toronto. Shazam! was released in North America on April 5, 2019.

Shazam! is set after the events of Justice League. Superman makes a cameo appearance at the end of the film, but his face is not shown as Henry Cavill was unable to reprise the role due to scheduling conflicts. The villain Mister Mind is introduced in a mid-credits scene.

### Birds of Prey (2020)

When Cassandra Cain, a young girl, comes across a diamond belonging to crime lord Black Mask, Harley Quinn joins forces with Black Canary, Huntress, and Renee Montoya to help protect her.

By November 2016, a film based on the female superhero team Birds of Prey was in development, with Christina Hodson signed on as screenwriter. By April 2018, Warner Bros. selected Cathy Yan as director, with Margot Robbie, Sue Kroll, and Bryan Unkless serving as producers. Margot Robbie reprised her role as Harley Quinn from Suicide Squad. The film is the first theatrical R-rated installment in the DCEU and has a smaller budget than most of the other films. In addition to Robbie's starring role, the cast also includes Mary Elizabeth Winstead, Jurnee Smollett-Bell, Rosie Perez, and Ella Jay Basco. The full title of the film was revealed as Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn) by Robbie. Principal photography commenced in January 2019 in Los Angeles and lasted until April. Birds of Prey held its world premiere in London on January 29, 2020, and was later released in North America on February 7.

Birds of Prey is set after the events of Suicide Squad.

### Wonder Woman 1984 (2020)

Diana Prince comes into conflict with the Soviet Union during the Cold War in the 1980s and finds two formidable foes in the form of Maxwell Lord and Cheetah.

By June 2017, Geoff Johns and Patty Jenkins had begun work on the story treatment for a Wonder Woman sequel. In July, Johns was working on the script, and the sequel was officially announced at San Diego Comic-Con, with Gadot reprising the lead role. In September, Jenkins signed a deal to return as director, and brought on David Callaham to pen the script with her and Johns. Production began in June 2018 and concluded that December. Filming locations included the District of Columbia, Northern Virginia, Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in the United Kingdom and the islands of Tenerife and Fuerteventura in Spain. Wonder Woman 1984 was released in the United States on HBO Max and in theaters simultaneously on December 25, 2020.

In a mid-credits scene, Lynda Carter, who starred as Wonder Woman in a 1970s television series, is introduced as Asteria, a legendary Amazon warrior who possessed ancient golden armor that Gadot's Wonder Woman wears in the film.

### The Suicide Squad (2021)

Amanda Waller sends a new Task Force X, consisting of both old and new members, on a mission to destroy a Nazi-era laboratory containing experiments.

In March 2016, a Suicide Squad sequel was announced to be in development, with Ayer returning as director. Adam Cozad was hired to write the script by March 2017. By July, a new story treatment was written by Zak Penn. In September, Gavin O'Connor was hired as director and writer after Ayer dropped out. O'Connor completed the script with David Bar Katz and Todd Stashwick by September 2018. The next month, O'Connor left the project as Warner Bros. believed the script was too similar to Birds of Prey. In 2019, the film was re-titled The Suicide Squad, with James Gunn directing, from a new script he wrote. Gunn chose the project over various other films Warner Bros. had in development, including a Superman film. In March, Idris Elba joined the cast. He was initially hired to replace Smith as Deadshot, who dropped out due to scheduling conflicts, but was later decided that Elba would play a new character so Smith could return in the future. Robbie, Kinnaman, Courtney, and Davis reprise their roles from Suicide Squad. Production began in September 2019 at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Atlanta, with additional filming following in Panama, and concluded in February 2020. The Suicide Squad began its international release on July 30, 2021, in the United Kingdom, and was released theatrically and on the streaming platform HBO Max in the United States on August 5.

### Black Adam (2022)

Nearly 5,000 years after he was bestowed with the powers of the Egyptian gods and imprisoned, Black Adam is freed from his tomb, ready to unleash his form of justice on the modern world.

In September 2014, after being considered to play Shazam and Lobo, Dwayne Johnson was cast as Black Adam, a central villain of DC's Shazam franchise. The character was intended to be introduced in Shazam!, but Johnson convinced the film's production studios to divide the narrative to focus on Black Adam's origin, with Black Adam and Shazam instead set to cross paths in a future film. Adam Sztykiel was hired as screenwriter. Jaume Collet-Serra was hired as director in June 2019, with Johnson, Beau Flynn, Hiram Garcia, and Dany Garcia attached as producers. By September 2020, Rory Haines and Sohrab Noshirvani had written a new draft of the script. Filming began in April 2021 and wrapped that July. Black Adam was released in the United States on October 21, 2022.

The film features the Justice Society of America, consisting of Aldis Hodge as Hawkman, Noah Centineo as Atom Smasher, Quintessa Swindell as Cyclone, and Pierce Brosnan as Doctor Fate. Reprising their roles from previous DCEU media are Davis as Amanda Waller, Djimon Hounsou as the wizard Shazam, and Jennifer Holland as Emilia Harcourt, with Henry Cavill appearing as Kal-El / Clark Kent / Superman in a mid-credits scene.

### Shazam! Fury of the Gods (2023)

Billy Batson and his foster siblings, who transform into superheroes by saying "Shazam!", are forced to get back into action and fight the Daughters of Atlas, who want to use a weapon that could destroy the world.

A sequel to Shazam! entered development in April 2019, with Henry Gayden returning as writer. David F. Sandberg and Peter Safran returned as director and producer, respectively, and Chris Morgan was hired as an additional screenwriter. Zachary Levi reprises his role as the titular superhero, as most of the adult and child cast in the Shazam Family. At DC FanDome in August 2020, the film's title was announced as Shazam! Fury of the Gods. Filming began in May 2021 in Atlanta and concluded that August. Shazam! Fury of the Gods was released in the United States on March 17, 2023.

In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that Shazam! Fury of the Gods will lead right into the events of The Flash.

### The Flash (2023)

Barry Allen travels back in time to prevent his mother's murder, which brings unintended consequences.

By July 2013, Greg Berlanti was developing a film that centered around Barry Allen / The Flash, and drafted a script alongside Geoff Johns, Chris Brancato, Michael Green, and Marc Guggenheim. In October 2014, Warner Bros. announced The Flash with a scheduled 2018 release date, and that Ezra Miller was cast in the starring role. A new story treatment was being written by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller the following year in April. Over the next two years, Seth Grahame-Smith and Rick Famuyiwa had individually dropped out as director due to creative differences with the studio. Joby Harold was hired to do a page-one rewrite of the script in January 2017, which previously had drafts written by Grahame-Smith and Famuyiwa. In July, the title for the film was changed to Flashpoint, based on the comic book storyline of the same name. Dan Mazeau was brought on as co-writer. In March 2018, John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein were hired to co-direct. In 2019, following creative differences with the co-directors' work on the script, Miller was hired to co-write a new draft in collaboration with Grant Morrison. By July, Daley and Goldstein had left the project, while Andy Muschietti and Christina Hodson were hired to replace them as director and screenwriter, respectively. Barbara Muschietti and Michael Disco serve as producers. Filming began in April 2021, at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in Hertfordshire, England, and wrapped that October. The Flash was released on June 16, 2023.

The Flash explores the multiverse concept using the Speed Force and features multiple superheroes, including Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman (reprising his role from the 1989 film Batman and its 1992 sequel Batman Returns) and Sasha Calle as Supergirl. Ben Affleck also reprises his role as the DCEU version of Bruce Wayne / Batman. The film also "restarts" the DCEU, according to Barbara Muschietti. Michael Shannon and Antje Traue reprise their roles as General Zod and Faora-Ul, respectively, from Man of Steel, with Ron Livingston replacing Billy Crudup in the role of Henry Allen, Barry's father, who appeared in Justice League and its director's cut, and Kiersey Clemons returning as Iris West from the latter cut.

In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that The Flash will "reset" the DC Universe and lead right into the events of Blue Beetle, Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom, and their future slate of films given the subtitle of: "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters". Gunn later explained that The Flash will change some aspects and characters, but not every aspect of the franchise that came before.

### Blue Beetle (2023)

After Jaime Reyes graduates from college and returns to his hometown Palmera City, he is chosen to become a symbiotic host to the Scarab, an ancient alien biotechnological relic that grants him a powerful exoskeleton armor, turning him into the superhero Blue Beetle.

In November 2018, a film centered on the Jaime Reyes incarnation of Blue Beetle was in development, with a script written by Gareth Dunnet-Alcocer. By February 2021, Angel Manuel Soto signed on as director, and Xolo Maridueña was cast as the titular character in August. John Rickard and Zev Foreman serve as producers. Principal photography commenced in May in Atlanta, and wrapped on July 18, 2022, in Puerto Rico. Initially developed as an HBO Max exclusive film, Blue Beetle was later changed to a theatrical release, and was released on August 18, 2023.

In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that Blue Beetle directly follows the events of The Flash, where much of the franchise will be "reset" in such a way that Blue Beetle will be "totally disconnected (from everything that came before) and can be a part of the DCU".

### Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom (2023)

Several years after the events of the first film, Arthur Curry / Aquaman is forced to protect Atlantis and his loved ones from devastation after an ancient power is unleashed by David Kane / Black Manta obtaining the cursed Black Trident. To achieve this, he will have to seek help from an unlikely ally, his brother Orm.

In January 2019, Warner Bros. confirmed development of an Aquaman sequel, with intentions for James Wan to return as director. In addition to starring, Momoa has a larger creative role in the sequel; together with his writing partner Thomas Pa'a Sibbett, he pitched their idea for the sequel to Warner Bros. and co-wrote the first story treatment. In February, David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick signed on as screenwriter; he completed the script alongside Wan. Producer Peter Safran said that the film will explore the other Seven Kingdoms of Atlantis. The title was announced as Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom. Filming occurred from June 2021 to January 2022 in the United Kingdom, Hawaii and Los Angeles. Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom was released on December 22, 2023.

In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom will take place following the "reset" of the timeline of the DC film by The Flash, and that it will be directly followed by the slate of projects given the subtitle of: "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters", mentioning the "true start" to occur in 2025.

## Television series

| Series | Season | Episodes | Episodes | Originally released | Originally released | Showrunner |
| - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Series | Season | Episodes | Episodes | First released | Last released | Showrunner |
| Peacemaker | 1 | 8 | 8 | January 13, 2022 (2022-01-13) | February 17, 2022 (2022-02-17) | James Gunn |

### Peacemaker (2022)

Task Force X member Christopher Smith / Peacemaker is sent on a black-ops mission to target "butterflies", individuals possessed by parasitic, insect-like creatures invading the human race.

By September 2020, a television series spin-off of The Suicide Squad centered on Peacemaker was in development for HBO Max. James Gunn served as an executive producer alongside Peter Safran, wrote its eight episodes and directed several of them. John Cena reprises his role as Peacemaker from the film. Filming began in Vancouver, Canada in January 2021 and concluded that July. The first three episodes of Peacemaker were released on January 13, 2022, with subsequent episodes releasing weekly until February 17. Soon after the series ended, the series was renewed for a second season, with Gunn set to write and direct every episode.

The first season of Peacemaker is set five months after the events of The Suicide Squad, with Steve Agee and Jennifer Holland reprising their respective roles as John Economos and Emilia Harcourt from that film. Viola Davis, Jason Momoa, and Ezra Miller also make uncredited appearances as their respective DCEU roles of Amanda Waller, Arthur Curry / Aquaman, and Barry Allen / Flash, with Superman and Wonder Woman also appearing portrayed by stand-ins, with their faces obscured by the darkness. The series contains references to the wider DC universe, including confirmation that Bat-Mite, Doll Man, Matter-Eater Lad, Kite Man, and Green Arrow exist in the DCEU. Additionally, a newspaper headline detailing the Intergang can be briefly seen, ahead of their debut in Black Adam.

After the second season was ordered following the positive reactions garnered by the series, with the show's creator James Gunn confirmed to write and direct all planned episodes, and John Cena set to reprise the title role, Gunn stated that the new season would explore the greater ramifications from the aftermath of the first season's events. Following the surprise cancellation of the HBO Max film Batgirl in August 2022, Gunn reaffirmed that Peacemaker's second season was "safe" and would continue development. Later in the same month he stated that filming was scheduled to begin in 2023, but in January 2023 Gunn said that the second season was delayed as he was busy working on other projects.

## Canceled and reworked projects

Over the years, many projects that were at one point supposed to be part of the DCEU have either been moved into a different continuity, outright canceled, or unreleased. Following the end of the DCEU and reboot into the DCU, various projects that were in development have been shelved though they may be repurposed for the new continuity:

* Batgirl : In March 2017, Joss Whedon was hired to write, direct and produce a film centered around Barbara Gordon / Batgirl. Whedon was to begin production on the film in 2018, but stepped down in February. In April, Christina Hodson was hired as the screenwriter for Batgirl. By November 2019, Hodson was expected to write the script once she had completed work on The Flash. In May 2021, Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah were hired as the film's co-directors, with Kristin Burr serving as producer. In July, Leslie Grace was cast in the titular role. Principal photography began in Glasgow in November 2021, and wrapped by the end of March 2022. Batgirl was scheduled to be released sometime in 2022 on HBO Max, though it was reportedly being reconsidered for theatrical release by Warner Bros. Discovery by April. That August, Warner Bros. Discovery canceled the plans to release the film on HBO Max or theatrically following poor test screenings. The film was deemed not "big" enough for the big screen yet too expensive to be released on HBO Max. Despite the project's cancellation, the studio still hoped to work with Arbi, Fallah and Grace on other DC projects. In January 2023, co-CEO of DC Studios Peter Safran commented that Zaslav had made the right decision with canceling the project, while providing positive statements regarding its creative team he stated that it was "not releasable". Safran elaborated that "it would not have been able to compete in the theatrical marketplace; it was built for the small screen". The studio however looks to reintroduce the character elsewhere in the franchise, while also intending to work with Arbi and Fallah in the future.
* Ben Affleck's The Batman : In July 2015, Ben Affleck was in negotiations to direct, produce, star in, and co-write (with Geoff Johns) a Batman film. Affleck was confirmed as the film's director at the San Diego Comic-Con 2016. Affleck stepped down as director in January 2017, and Matt Reeves was hired to direct and co-produce the film the next month. Under Reeves, the film shifted focus towards a younger, more inexperienced iteration of the character while drawing more from the comics' roots in noir and detective fiction. Affleck eventually left the project altogether, and was replaced by Robert Pattinson as Batman, allowing the film to drop its connections to the DCEU, establishing it in a new standalone universe.
* Batman Beyond : In December 2022, it was reported that a Batman Beyond film starring Michael Keaton was in development, with a script by Christina Hodson. The plot would have involved an aged Bruce Wayne, continuing the plot threads from his appearance in The Flash, and would have included Catwoman. Development on the film was shelved after Gunn and Safran were appointed as co-heads of DC Studios. In January 2023, Gunn and Safran said that there is potential for a future multiverse project in which they may incorporate Keaton's incarnation of Batman.
* Untitled Black Adam sequel: In April 2017, Johnson stated that DC Films planned on Black Adam and Shazam appearing in a future film together. In October 2022, Johnson confirmed future plans for Black Adam to fight Superman in the DCEU, and reaffirmed plans for the character to crossover with Shazam. That month, producers Hiram Garcia and Beau Flynn stated that the sequel was in development, with plans to fast-track production on the project. Johnson publicly revealed that December that the character would not be a part of the initial slate of projects lined up for the new DC film universe under Gunn and Safran. He added that both DC Studios and his production company Seven Bucks Productions would continue collaborating in the future, and that the studio intended to "continue exploring the most valuable ways Black Adam can be utilized in future DC multiverse chapters".
* Black Canary : By August 2021, an HBO Max-exclusive film centered around Dinah Lance / Black Canary entered development with Jurnee Smollett reprising her role from Birds of Prey, Misha Green writing the script, and Sue Kroll producing. In June 2022, Smollett said that development on the project continued.
* Untitled Crisis on Infinite Earths film: In August 2022, when the Warner Bros. Discovery merger was completed and Walter Hamada began preparations to leave his role as President of DC Films, it was reported that prior to these events Warner Bros. had been developing a project based on Crisis on Infinite Earths. The plot would have similarly incorporated the multiverse and iterations of the main characters from alternate realities. Following Hamada's departure from the studios, the project's future realization is dependent on Gunn and Safran's plans for the franchise.
* Cyborg : In April 2014, Ray Fisher was cast as Victor Stone / Cyborg, and Warner Bros. announced a film centered around the character was in development the following October. Joe Morton was set to reprise his role as Dr. Silas Stone. Morton commented that there were discussions to include scenes involving Cyborg that were cut during post-production on the theatrical release of Justice League. Fisher expressed his desire for Zack Snyder to direct the film. Cyborg was scheduled to be released on April 3, 2020, but was later delayed. In April 2020, Fisher confirmed that development on the project continued; though by 2021, amidst a dispute between the actor and Warner Bros. Pictures regarding an investigation in the reshoot process on Justice League, he said that he would not play the role in any film that had Hamada's involvement. DC Films responded that they would not recast the role. Fisher later commented that he would only reprise the role if Snyder's canceled Justice League sequel was to be revived. In March, Fisher said that he is not opposed to reprising the role in future DCEU films, with the actor preferring Cyborg to be directed by Snyder or Rick Famuyiwa. In February 2022, when discussing the Justice League's appearance in the final episode of Peacemaker, Gunn revealed that Cyborg did not appear in the scene due to the studio's planned "future" with the character. In October 2023, it was reported by Variety that no cast members from Justice League would reprise their roles in the DC Universe, effectively ending any chances of Fisher returning to the role.
* Deadshot : By December 2016, a film centered around Floyd Lawton / Deadshot was in development, with Will Smith reprising his role from Suicide Squad. In February 2019, Smith left due to scheduling conflicts, and by April, the character was written out of The Suicide Squad to allow Smith an opportunity to return in a future film. As of April 2022, production on the film was delayed in favor of other projects due to the production payroll that Smith had requested.
* Deathstroke : In October 2017, a film centered around Slade Wilson / Deathstroke was announced to be in development with Gareth Evans attached as screenwriter and director from a story by Joe Manganiello, who was also set to reprise his role from Justice League. The project was greenlit after Evans impressed executives with his pitch. By April 2020, Evans was no longer in negotiations to work on the project, stating that he had never been contractually involved with its development. He described the story as a "dark" and "unforgiving" origin story, similar to Korean noir films. In March 2021, after numerous delays, Manganiello confirmed that Deathstroke had been canceled because Warner Bros. did not consider it a priority. The project was brought back in discussions to revive it as part of Gunn and Safran's plans for the future of the DCEU in December 2022.
* The Flash sequel: In October 2022, it was revealed that the script for a sequel to The Flash had already been completed by David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick, although the project's realization depends on the success of the first film.
* Green Lantern : Originally, the 2011 Green Lantern film was planned to be the first film in a shared DC cinematic universe, but its planned sequels were canceled in September 2011 and the film was eventually left out of continuity due to its critical and financial disappointment. The film was eventually established retroactively to be set within the multiverse of DC media, designated as Earth-12 in the Arrowverse crossover event "Crisis on Infinite Earths".
* Gotham City Sirens : A film based on the Gotham City Sirens (a team consisting of Harley Quinn, Catwoman, and Poison Ivy) was in development by December 2016, with Ayer signed on as director and co-producer from a script by Geneva Robertson-Dworet. Robbie and Leto were set to reprise their roles of Quinn and the Joker from Suicide Squad, with Robbie also taking the role of an executive producer. The film's development was later postponed in favor of Birds of Prey. In January 2020, Ayer confirmed that the project was still on hold, and Robbie stated that she chose to film Birds of Prey first to introduce audiences to lesser-known characters. She said that she was still "pushing" forward with Gotham City Sirens, and hopes to explore the relationship of Quinn with Ivy and Catwoman. In 2022, Robbie revealed that there were plans for the character to return in the franchise, and that she was continuing to advocate for a romantic relationship to be portrayed between Quinn and Ivy.
* Harley Quinn vs. The Joker : By July 2017, a film featuring Harley Quinn and the Joker was in development with the working title of Harley Quinn vs. the Joker, scheduled to begin production after The Suicide Squad. Glenn Ficarra and John Requa were hired as co-writers, co-directors, and co-producers. In September 2018, the script was completed and submitted to Warner Bros., and the production was scheduled to commence after Birds of Prey. The film was canceled by February 2019.
* Hourman : In March 2021, a film focused on the character of Hourman, written by Gavin James and Neil Widener was in development.
* Untitled John Constantine television series: In February 2021, a series focusing on John Constantine entered development at HBO Max. The series, featuring a young Constantine in contemporary London, was planned to be horror-oriented and would tie in with Justice League Dark. Guy Bolton was hired to write the pilot, while J. J. Abrams was attached as an executive producer. The creatives involved were determined to have a diverse cast pool, while looking to the non-white actors for the lead role. By August 2022, the series was still in development, while also tentatively scheduled to begin production in early-2023. In September, after four episodes of the series were written, the series was no longer moving forward at HBO Max in favor of developing of a sequel to the film Constantine (2005). In October, the series was confirmed to still be in development and being shopped around to other streaming services.
* Untitled Joker film: In June 2018, a film featuring the Joker entered development. Jared Leto was attached as an executive producer in addition to reprising his role as the Joker, as well as being involved with hiring the film's production crew. By February 2019, the film had been canceled, and a Joker film unrelated to the DCEU was released later that year.
* Untitled Justice League sequel: In October 2014, Justice League Part Two was announced, with Snyder returning as director. Deborah Snyder later revealed that Justice League would not be one film split into two parts. The film was scheduled to be released on June 14, 2019, but production was pushed back to accommodate The Batman. Joss Whedon, the director of Justice League's reshoots, would eventually rework one of the film's post-credit scenes to tease the Injustice League as villains of a possible sequel. In October 2017, J. K. Simmons stated that work on the script was in-progress, while in December, Variety reported that there were "no immediate plans" for Snyder to return as director. By 2019, Warner Bros. had prioritized standalone films over the project. WarnerMedia CEO Ann Sarnoff stated in March 2021 that Zack Snyder's Justice League was considered "a storytelling cul-de-sac" by the studio, with no sequels planned. In August, producer Charles Roven confirmed the studio's interest in a Justice League sequel, but added that it was still "a number of years away". A sequel was once again under consideration while De Luca and Abdy were in charge of DC Films, before Gunn and Safran took over.
* Justice League Dark : In January 2013, Guillermo del Toro began developing a film centered on the Justice League Dark and submitted a script in November the next year, but was no longer attached by June 2015. In August 2016, Doug Liman joined to direct with the title Dark Universe, alongside Scott Rudin producing and Michael Gilio rewriting the script. Liman left the following May due to scheduling conflicts. In mid-2017, it was retitled Justice League Dark with Gerard Johnstone polishing the script. By April 2020, the project was redeveloped as a series for HBO Max, with J. J. Abrams serving as an executive producer. Justice League Dark was intended to premiere after the individual team members were introduced in their own series, with the studios involved inspired to a similar approach as Marvel Television's Netflix series individually premiering before crossing over in The Defenders (2017). By February 2023, the series was no longer moving forward.
* Krypton : In October 2014, Man of Steel writer David S. Goyer was announced to be developing a television series focused on the planet Krypton. During the development, Goyer revealed that the series would use unused concepts for the planet that were created for Man of Steel. In early marketing materials for the series and the first teaser that debuted at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con, the Superman logo designed for the DCEU films was used to represent the House of El, implying that the series would have been a direct prequel to Man of Steel. During the casting process, the production crew sought an actor who resembled a young Henry Cavill to portray Seg-El, Superman's grandfather, while Goyer stated that the series was planned to take place 200 years prior to the events of Man of Steel. Ultimately, all connections to Man of Steel were dropped by the series' release in March 2018. Executive producer Cameron Welsh later described the series as "adjacent" to both the DCEU and the Arrowverse.
* Lobo : In September 2009, a film centered around Lobo was in development. Guy Ritchie and Brad Peyton were attached to direct at different times, while Dwayne Johnson was originally intended to star. After various iterations, in 2016, Jason Fuchs was hired as screenwriter. By February 2018, Michael Bay was attached to direct. Fuchs rewrote the script at Bay's request so the budget could be considerably lowered. In November 2022, Jason Momoa revealed that under the direction of Gunn and Safran, a project that he categorized as a "dream come true" was in development, which included his favorite comic book character. The project was later reported to be Lobo. In January 2023, Gunn and Safran addressed Momoa's involvement with future adaptations of the character, while stating that the actor would not portray two characters in the franchise.
* Madame X : In June 2021, a series focusing on Madame Xanadu entered development at HBO Max. Angela Robinson was attached to write and executive produce the series along with J.J. Abrams. The series was planned to tie in with Justice League Dark. By September 2022, the project was dropped by HBO Max and was being shopped around to other streaming services.
* Untitled Man of Steel sequel: By October 2014, a sequel to Man of Steel was in development, with Henry Cavill set to reprise his role. Matthew Vaughn had discussions with the studio to direct the film in 2017, but after two years, the talks with Warner Bros. ended in March and Vaughn left the film. Shortly after in July, Christopher McQuarrie said that he and Cavill had pitched a sequel idea to Warner Bros. over a year prior, with the plot having ties to Green Lantern Corps, but he moved on to other projects due to what he perceived as no movement on the films. Later, Michael B. Jordan had pitched his own take on the character, but was not ready to commit due to an already busy schedule. By November, Warner Bros. had entered negotiations with J. J. Abrams about taking control of the project. The film was no longer in active development by May 2020, but Cavill entered negotiations to reprise the role in a different film. Snyder later stated that his plans for the plot had included Brainiac and the Kryptonians who were banished to the Phantom Zone at the end of Man of Steel. In 2022, after Cavill reprised his role in Black Adam, a film centered around his iteration of Superman was back in active development, intended to serve as the first film focusing solely on the character since Man of Steel. Charles Roven was hired as producer at that time, with a story pitch written by Steven Knight. The studio was actively searching for a director. Cavill confirmed in October that he would reprise the role in multiple future installments. However, that December, while De Luca and Abdy had worked closely with Cavill to announce his return as Superman, Gunn and Safran instead opted to develop a film with the character at a younger age. Cavill confirmed that he would no longer play Superman.
* The Metal Men : In April 2007, a film centered around the Metal Men entered development with Eric Champnella as screenwriter; Lauren Shuler Donner and Jack Leslie also joined as producers. In May 2012, Barry Sonnenfeld entered negotiations with Warner Bros. to direct the film and was hired the next month. DC Entertainment president Diane Nelson reiterated in 2013 the company's intentions to make the film. The development was in limbo for several years until October 2021, when Sonnenfeld revealed that the film's story was still being written. In November 2022, Gunn confirmed that he and Safran had plans for the team in the future of the franchise.
* New Gods : In March 2018, Ava DuVernay signed on to direct a film centered around the New Gods. Initially with a script written by Kario Salem, Tom King was later brought to co-write the film with DuVernay. Darkseid was planned to be the main antagonist of the film, and the Female Furies were set to appear. The fourth draft of the script was ongoing in 2020. In December, DuVernay said that the COVID-19 pandemic had given her and King time to dig into "the mind and musings of Jack Kirby". New Gods was canceled in April 2021, though Warner Bros. stated that it could be revived in the future. According to The Hollywood Reporter, the project faced difficulties due to Darkseid's role in Zack Snyder's Justice League, and Warner Bros. wanted time to pass before the character appeared again. Later, DuVernay revealed that Mister Miracle, Big Barda, Granny Goodness, and Highfather would have appeared in the film.
* Nightwing : By February 2017, a film centered around Dick Grayson / Nightwing was in development, with Chris McKay and Bill Dubuque signed on as director and screenwriter, respectively. Although the script was nearing its final draft, McKay said in June 2021 that the project was delayed due to DC having "other priorities", but also reaffirmed his intentions to still make the film. He also said that the film could possibly be reworked to remove its connections to the DCEU continuity. In August 2023, the project was canceled.
* Untitled Black Manta film: In February 2019, Warner Bros. announced a horror-themed spin-off from Aquaman focusing on the villainous Trench kingdom. Safran and James Wan were set to produce, with Noah Gardner and Aidan Fitzgerald writing the script. The film was planned to have a lower production budget than other DCEU films. The film was expected to be released before Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom. In April 2021, the project was canceled, though Warner Bros. said that it may be revived in the future. In October, Wan revealed that the initially announced name of The Trench was a working title, to misdirect the audience that the movie was secretly a Black Manta film.
* Plastic Man : By December 2018, a comedy-action adventure film based on Plastic Man was in development with Amanda Idoko hired to write the script. In December 2020, Cat Vasko was hired to do a rewrite of Idoko's screenplay, with the project reworked to be a female-centered film.
* Static Shock : At DC FanDome held in August 2020, a live-action film centered around Static was revealed to be in development, with Michael B. Jordan joining the production team as a producer alongside Reginald Hudlin in October. Walter Hamada described the film as a project that could be developed as an HBO Max-exclusive film. In March 2021, Randy McKinnon was hired as screenwriter.
* Untitled Val-Zod television series: By July 2021, a limited series centered around Val-Zod was in development for HBO Max. Michael B. Jordan was set to produce the series and also potentially star, while Darnell Metayer and Josh Peters were attached to write. Jordan previously pitched a feature film centered around an African-American Superman, only to place development on hold due to his busy production schedule.
* The Wonder Twins: In February 2022, a film centered around Zan and Jayne / the Wonder Twins entered development for HBO Max. Adam Sztykiel was slated to make his directorial debut and write the screenplay, with Marty Bowen and Wyck Godfrey serving as producers. By that April, KJ Apa and Isabel May were cast in the lead roles of Zan and Jayna, respectively. Principal photography was scheduled to commence in Atlanta, Georgia in July, but the project was canceled in May following WarnerMedia's merge with Discovery Inc. and the creation of Warner Bros. Discovery. The CEO of the newly formed conglomerate, David Zaslav, felt that the film's estimated $75 million-plus budget would not bolster enough of a return as a straight-to-streaming release. Additionally, Zaslav has a directive mandate that DC Films will first focus on theatrical releases, with internal criticism also stating that the project was conceived in a style deemed "too niche".
* Untitled Wonder Woman 1984 sequel: After principal photography on Wonder Woman 1984 was completed, director and co-writer Patty Jenkins said that the plot for a third Wonder Woman film had been written. She revealed that the story arc for Wonder Woman was planned over three films, with the third taking place in the present. Jenkins and Gadot planned to work on other projects before proceeding with the sequel. In 2020, Jenkins said she had stories written for two more Wonder Woman films completed. Two days after 1984 was released, a third film was officially greenlit by Warner Bros. Pictures. Jenkins was set to return as director, with a script she wrote, while Gadot was planned to reprise her role as the titular heroine. In October 2021, Gadot stated that Lynda Carter would reprise her role as Asteria from 1984. A year later, Jenkins revealed that the script for the film was completed, while also stating that she had tentative plans for further installments. Filming was expected to begin in mid-2023, but in December the third film was revealed to be no longer moving forward because the script conflicted with the current plans for the DCEU formulated by Gunn and Safran.
* Zatanna : By November 2018, Warner Bros. was considering developing a film based on Zatanna. In March 2021, an AT&T investor presentation revealed that a Zatanna project was in development as an HBO Max-exclusive film, and Emerald Fennell was hired as screenwriter later that month. The film was to be produced by J. J. Abrams. By October 2022, the film was initially scrapped at HBO Max, but later began being shopped around to other streaming services.

## Expanded setting

In October 2014, Geoff Johns explained that DC's approach to their films and television series would be different from Marvel Studios' cinematic universe, stating that their film universe and TV universes would be kept separate within a multiverse to allow "everyone to make the best possible product, to tell the best story, to do the best world". This divide lasted until January 2020, when the DCEU was retroactively established to have connections to The CW's Arrowverse continuity via an expansion of the multiverse concept, during Part 4 of the "Crisis on Infinite Earths" crossover. Ezra Miller reprised their role as Barry Allen in a cameo appearance alongside Grant Gustin's version of the character. During their conversation, Miller's Barry gets the idea to call himself "The Flash" from his alternate self and mentions "Victor". Despite their cameo, the episode did not confirm the designated Earth for the DCEU characters.

Miller's cameo opened up more possibilities for crossovers between DC films and the Arrowverse. President of DC Films, Walter Hamada, revealed that prior to "Crisis on Infinite Earths", DC had been structured in a way that the television division had to clear the use of characters with the film division. Now, the company could "really lean into this idea of [the multiverse] and acknowledge the fact there can be a Flash on TV and one in the movies, and you don't have to pick one or the other, and they both exist in this multiverse". Arrowverse creator and executive producer Greg Berlanti agreed, feeling that "moving forward, there's more opportunity to do more things like this", and was open to more film characters appearing in the Arrowverse.

In August 2020, Hamada announced plans to develop a multiverse inspired by the comics. In doing so, the studio also stated that all past, present, and future projects are a part of the same unified multiverse. The Flash director Andy Muschietti further explained that all previous adaptations of DC Comics were a part of the multiverse: "...all the cinematic iterations that we've seen before are valid... all that you've seen exists, and everything that you will see exists, in the same unified multiverse". In 2023, the DCEU version of Shazam made a cameo appearance through archival footage in the Titans season 4 episode "Dude, Where's My Gar?".

## Timeline

In the DCEU, the events of the films rarely explicitly make their exact years known. Man of Steel takes place after the events of Wonder Woman and Wonder Woman 1984, which are set in 1918 and 1984, respectively. Wonder Woman also has bookend scenes set in the present after the events of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. The events of Batman v Superman occur 18 months after the events of Man of Steel, which follows the consequences and the emergence of aliens and metahumans such as Superman. The film concludes with the death of Superman, which is emphasized in Suicide Squad and Justice League, taking place approximately one and two years later, respectively.

Jason Momoa confirmed that Aquaman takes place right after Zack Snyder's Justice League. Aquaman is followed by Shazam!, which occurs during the Christmas season of 2018. Shazam! Fury of the Gods is set about two years after its predecessor. The events of Birds of Prey are set in 2020, followed by The Suicide Squad, confirmed to take place in 2021. Peacemaker is set five months after the events of The Suicide Squad. Black Adam is confirmed to take place after Justice League.

## Recurring cast and characters

This section includes characters who have appeared in three or more separate character franchises.

* An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film.
* $^A$ indicates an appearance through archival footage or audio.
* $^C$ indicates a cameo role.
* $^E$ indicates an appearance not included in the theatrical cut.
* $^G$ indicates a guest appearance in the season.
* $^P$ indicates an appearance in onscreen photographs.
* $^S$ indicates an appearance through use of special effects.
* $^U$ indicates an uncredited appearance.

| Character | Film | Film | Film | Film | Film | Film | Film | Film | Film | Film | Television |
| - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Character | Man of Steel | Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice | Suicide Squad films | Wonder Woman films | Justice League films | Aquaman films | Shazam films | Birds of Prey | Black Adam | The Flash | Peacemaker |
| Barry Allen The Flash | | Ezra Miller | Ezra Miller | | Ezra Miller | | | | | Ezra Miller | Ezra Miller |
| Arthur Curry Aquaman | | Jason Momoa | Jason Momoa | | Jason Momoa | Jason Momoa | | | | Jason Momoa | Jason Momoa |
| John Economos | | | Steve Agee | | | | Steve Agee | | | | Steve Agee |
| Kal-El / Clark Kent Superman | Henry Cavill | Henry Cavill | | | Henry Cavill | | Ryan Hadley | | Henry Cavill | Henry Cavill | Brad Abramenko |
| Emilia Harcourt | | | Jennifer Holland | | | | Jennifer Holland | | Jennifer Holland | | Jennifer Holland |
| Joker | | | Jared Leto | | Jared Leto | | | John GothJared Leto | | | |
| J'onn J'onzz / Calvin Swanwick Martian Manhunter | Harry Lennix | Harry Lennix | | | Harry Lennix | | | | | | |
| Jonathan Kent | Kevin Costner | Kevin Costner | | | Kevin Costner | | | | | | |
| Martha Kent | Diane Lane | Diane Lane | | | Diane Lane | | | | | | |
| Lois Lane | Amy Adams | Amy Adams | | | Amy Adams | | | | | | |
| Alfred Pennyworth | | Jeremy Irons | | | Jeremy Irons | | | | | Jeremy Irons | |
| Diana Prince Wonder Woman | | Gal Gadot | | Gal Gadot | Gal Gadot | | Gal Gadot | | | Gal Gadot | Kimberley von Ilberg |
| Amanda Waller | | | Viola Davis | | | | | | Viola Davis | | Viola Davis |
| Bruce Wayne Batman | | Ben Affleck | Ben Affleck | | Ben Affleck | | | | | Ben Affleck | |
| General Zod | Michael Shannon | Michael Shannon | | | | | | | | Michael Shannon | |

## Reception

### Box-office performance

| Film | U.S. release date | Box office gross | Box office gross | Box office gross | Budget | Ref. |
| - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Film | U.S. release date | U.S. and Canada | Other territories | Worldwide | Budget | Ref. |
| Man of Steel | June 14, 2013 | $291,045,518 | $379,100,000 | $670,145,518 | $225 million | |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice | March 25, 2016 | $330,360,194 | $544,002,609 | $874,362,803 | $250 million | |
| Suicide Squad | August 5, 2016 | $325,100,054 | $424,100,000 | $749,200,054 | $175 million | |
| Wonder Woman | June 2, 2017 | $412,845,172 | $411,125,510 | $823,970,682 | $149 million | |
| Justice League | November 17, 2017 | $229,024,295 | $432,302,692 | $661,326,987 | $300 million | |
| Aquaman | December 21, 2018 | $335,104,314 | $816,924,079 | $1,152,028,393 | $160 million | |
| Shazam! | April 5, 2019 | $140,480,049 | $227,318,962 | $367,799,011 | $100 million | |
| Birds of Prey | February 7, 2020 | $84,172,791 | $121,200,000 | $205,372,791 | $84.5 million | |
| Wonder Woman 1984 | December 25, 2020 | $46,801,036 | $122,800,000 | $169,601,036 | $200 million | |
| The Suicide Squad | August 5, 2021 | $55,817,425 | $112,900,000 | $168,717,425 | $185 million | |
| Black Adam | October 21, 2022 | $168,152,111 | $225,300,000 | $393,452,111 | $195 million | |
| Shazam! Fury of the Gods | March 17, 2023 | $57,638,006 | $76,400,000 | $134,038,006 | $125 million | |
| The Flash | June 16, 2023 | $108,133,313 | $163,200,000 | $271,333,313 | $200 million | |
| Blue Beetle | August 18, 2023 | $72,488,072 | $58,300,000 | $130,788,072 | $104 million | |
| Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom | December 22, 2023 | $118,004,919 | $294,600,000 | $412,604,919 | $205 million | |
| Total | Total | $2,775,167,269 | $4,409,573,852 | $7,184,741,121 | $2.657 billion | |

### Critical and public response

Critical and public response of DC Extended Universe films :

| Title | Critical | Critical | Public | Public |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| Title | Rotten Tomatoes | Metacritic | CinemaScore | PostTrak |
| Man of Steel | 56% (344 reviews) | 55 (47 reviews) | A− | — |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice | 29% (439 reviews) | 44 (51 reviews) | B | 73% |
| Suicide Squad | 26% (394 reviews) | 40 (53 reviews) | B+ | 73% |
| Wonder Woman | 93% (480 reviews) | 76 (50 reviews) | A | 82% |
| Justice League | 39% (411 reviews) | 45 (52 reviews) | B+ | 85% |
| Aquaman | 65% (414 reviews) | 55 (50 reviews) | A– | — |
| Shazam! | 90% (421 reviews) | 71 (53 reviews) | A | 83% |
| Birds of Prey | 78% (445 reviews) | 60 (59 reviews) | B+ | — |
| Wonder Woman 1984 | 58% (451 reviews) | 60 (58 reviews) | B+ | 78% |
| Zack Snyder's Justice League | 72% (312 reviews) | 54 (46 reviews) | — | — |
| The Suicide Squad | 90% (382 reviews) | 72 (55 reviews) | B+ | 83% |
| Black Adam | 38% (304 reviews) | 41 (52 reviews) | B+ | — |
| Shazam! Fury of the Gods | 49% (258 reviews) | 47 (49 reviews) | B+ | 78% |
| The Flash | 63% (387 reviews) | 55 (55 reviews) | B | 77% |
| Blue Beetle | 78% (274 reviews) | 61 (52 reviews) | B+ | 82% |
| Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom | 34% (200 reviews) | 42 (43 reviews) | B | 69% |

Critical response of DC Extended Universe series :

| Title | Season | Rotten Tomatoes | Metacritic |
| - | - | - | - |
| Peacemaker | 1 | 94% (89 reviews) | 70 (26 reviews) |

### Accolades

The franchise has won an Academy Award, nominated for three Annie Awards, seven Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning two), 13 Critics' Choice Super Awards (winning two), 12 Golden Raspberry (winning four), five Grammy Awards, two Hugo Awards (winning one), three Golden Reel Awards, 14 MTV Movie & TV Awards (winning two), one Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Award, 35 Saturn Awards (winning one), and eight Visual Effects Society Awards, among others.

## Music

### Soundtracks

| Title | U.S. release date | Performed by | Length | Label |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| Man of Steel: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | June 11, 2013 (2013-06-11) | Hans Zimmer | 87:49118:18 (Deluxe Edition) | WaterTower Music |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | March 18, 2016 (2016-03-18) | Hans Zimmer Junkie XL | 71:3590:27 (Deluxe Edition) | WaterTower Music |
| Suicide Squad: The Album | August 5, 2016 (2016-08-05) | Various Artists | 50:5760:49 (Collector Edition) | Atlantic |
| Suicide Squad: Original Motion Picture Score | August 5, 2016 (2016-08-05) | Steven Price | 72:3393:38 (Digital Edition) | WaterTower Music |
| Wonder Woman: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | June 2, 2017 (2017-06-02) | Rupert Gregson-Williams | 78:38 | WaterTower Music |
| Justice League: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | November 10, 2017 (2017-11-10) | Danny Elfman | 101:22 | WaterTower Music |
| Aquaman: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | December 14, 2018 (2018-12-14) | Rupert Gregson-Williams | 65:02 | WaterTower Music |
| Shazam!: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | April 5, 2019 (2019-04-05) | Benjamin Wallfisch | 73:13 | WaterTower Music |
| Birds of Prey: The Album | February 7, 2020 (2020-02-07) | Various Artists | 42:52 | Atlantic |
| Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn) – Original Motion Picture Score | February 14, 2020 (2020-02-14) | Daniel Pemberton | 62:52 | WaterTower Music |
| Wonder Woman 1984: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | December 16, 2020 (2020-12-16) | Hans Zimmer | 90:23 | WaterTower Music |
| Wonder Woman 1984: Sketches from the Soundtrack | February 5, 2021 (2021-02-05) | Hans Zimmer | 72:27 | WaterTower Music |
| Zack Snyder's Justice League: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | March 18, 2021 (2021-03-18) | Tom Holkenborg | 234:09 | WaterTower Music |
| The Suicide Squad: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | August 6, 2021 (2021-08-06) | Various Artists | 45:25 | WaterTower Music |
| The Suicide Squad: Score from Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | August 6, 2021 (2021-08-06) | John Murphy | 50:58 | WaterTower Music |
| Peacemaker: Soundtrack from the Series | February 18, 2022 (2022-02-18) | Kevin Kiner Clint Mansell | 70:00 | WaterTower Music |
| Black Adam: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | October 21, 2022 (2022-10-21) | Lorne Balfe | 109:00 | WaterTower Music |
| Shazam! Fury of the Gods (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) | March 10, 2023 (2023-03-10) | Christophe Beck | 60:25 | WaterTower Music |
| The Flash: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | June 16, 2023 (2023-06-16) | Benjamin Wallfisch | 83:31 | WaterTower Music |
| Blue Beetle: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | August 18, 2023 (2023-08-18) | Bobby Krlic | 86:04 | WaterTower Music |
| Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack | December 22, 2023 (2023-12-22) | Rupert Gregson-Williams | 52:29 | WaterTower Music |

### Singles

**Films**

| Title | U.S. release date | Length | Artist(s) | Label | Film |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| "Heathens" | June 16, 2016 (2016-06-16) | 3:15 | Twenty One Pilots | Atlantic | Suicide Squad |
| "Sucker for Pain" | June 24, 2016 (2016-06-24) | 4:03 | Lil Wayne, Wiz Khalifa, Imagine Dragons, Logic and Ty Dolla Sign featuring X Ambassadors | Atlantic | Suicide Squad |
| "Purple Lamborghini" | July 22, 2016 (2016-07-22) | 3:35 | Skrillex and Rick Ross | Atlantic | Suicide Squad |
| "Gangsta" | August 1, 2016 (2016-08-01) | 2:57 | Kehlani | Atlantic | Suicide Squad |
| "To Be Human" | May 25, 2017 (2017-05-25) | 4:01 | Sia featuring Labrinth | WaterTower Music | Wonder Woman |
| "Come Together" | September 8, 2017 (2017-09-08) | 3:13 | Gary Clark Jr. and Junkie XL | WaterTower Music | Justice League |
| "Everybody Knows" | November 10, 2017 (2017-11-10) | 4:26 | Sigrid | WaterTower Music | Justice League |
| "Everything I Need" | December 14, 2018 (2018-12-14) | 3:16 | Skylar Grey | WaterTower Music | Aquaman |
| "Ocean to Ocean" | December 14, 2018 (2018-12-14) | 2:25 | Pitbull featuring Rhea | WaterTower Music | Aquaman |
| "Diamonds" | January 10, 2020 (2020-01-10) | 3:19 | Megan Thee Stallion and Normani | Atlantic | Birds of Prey |
| "Joke's On You" | January 17, 2020 (2020-01-17) | 3:04 | Charlotte Lawrence | Atlantic | Birds of Prey |
| "Boss Bitch" | January 24, 2020 (2020-01-24) | 2:14 | Doja Cat | Atlantic | Birds of Prey |
| "Sway With Me" | January 31, 2020 (2020-01-31) | 2:48 | Saweetie and GALXARA | Atlantic | Birds of Prey |
| "Experiment On Me" | February 7, 2020 (2020-02-07) | 3:35 | Halsey | Atlantic | Birds of Prey |
| "Sway With Me" (GALXARA Version) | May 1, 2020 (2020-05-01) | 2:33 | GALXARA | Atlantic | Birds of Prey |
| "Rain" | June 22, 2021 (2021-06-22) | 3:56 | Grandson and Jessie Reyez | Atlantic | The Suicide Squad |
| "Oh No!!!" (The Suicide Squad Version) | July 2, 2021 (2021-07-02) | 3:33 | Grandson, Vic Mensa and Masked Wolf | Atlantic | The Suicide Squad |
| "Deep End" | November 17, 2023 (2023-11-17) | 3:00 | X Ambassadors | WaterTower Music | Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom |

**Television series**

| Title | U.S. release date | Length | Artist(s) | Label | Television |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| "Pumped Up Kicks" | January 9, 2022 (2022-01-09) | 3:26 | John Murphy featuring Ralph Saenz | WaterTower Music | Peacemaker |
| "Home Sweet Home" (Piano Version) | February 4, 2022 (2022-02-04) | 2:06 | John Cena | WaterTower Music | Peacemaker |

## Other media

### Novels

| Title | Publication date(s) | Writer(s) | Note |
| - | - | - | - |
| Man of Steel: The Early Years: Junior Novel | April 30, 2013 | Frank Whitman | Tie-in children's book to Man of Steel. |
| Man of Steel: The Official Movie Novelization | June 18, 2013 | Greg Cox | Novelization of the film. |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice – Cross Fire | February 16, 2016 | Michael Kogge | Tie-in prequel novel to Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. |
| Suicide Squad: The Official Movie Novelization | August 5, 2016 | Marv Wolfman | Novelization of the film. |
| Wonder Woman: The Junior Novel | May 30, 2017 | Steve Korte | Novelization of the film. |
| Wonder Woman: The Official Movie Novelization | June 6, 2017 | Nancy Holder | Novelization of the film. |
| Aquaman: The Junior Novel | November 6, 2018 | Jim McCann | Novelization of the film. |
| Aquaman: Arthur's Guide to Atlantis | November 6, 2018 | Alexandra West | Guide book |
| Aquaman: Undertow | November 6, 2018 | Steve Behling | Tie-in prequel novel to Aquaman. |
| Shazam!: The Junior Novel | February 26, 2019 | Calliope Glass | Novelization of the film. |
| Shazam!: Freddy's Guide to Super Hero-ing | February 26, 2019 | Steve Behling | Guide book |
| Wonder Woman 1984: The Junior Novel | July 7, 2020 | Calliope Glass | Novelization of the film. |
| Wonder Woman 1984: Truth, Love & Wonder | July 7, 2020 | Alexandra West | Quotes book |

### Comics

| Title | Issue(s) | Publication date(s) | Writer(s) | Artist(s) | Notes |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Man of Steel – Prequel | 1 | May 18, 2013 | Sterling Gates | Jerry Ordway | Promotional digital prequel comic from Walmart. |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice | 5 | January 28, 2016 | Christos Gage | Joe Bennet | Promotional digital prequel comics from Dr Pepper. |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice | 4 | February 28, 2016 | Jeff Parker, Christos Gage, Marguerite Bennett, and Joshua Williamson | R. B. Silva, Federico Dallochio, Marcus To, and Eduardo Pansica | Promotional prequel mini-comics that appeared in select General Mills cereal. |
| Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice – Upstairs/Downstairs | 1 | February 29, 2016 | Christos Gage | Joe Bennet | Promotional prequel digital comic from Doritos and Walmart. |
| Suicide Squad: Suicide Blonde | 1 | June 2, 2016 | Tony Bedard | Tom Derenick, Juan Albarran, Hi-Fi, and Lori Jackson | Promotional prequel comic from Splat Hair Dye. |
| Mercedes-Benz Presents: Justice League | 6 | October 20, 2017 – November 15, 2017 | Adam Schlagman | Jason Badower | Promotional digital comic from Mercedes-Benz. |
| Wonder Woman 1984: Museum Mayhem | 1 | September 29, 2020 | Anna Obropta, Louise Simonson, and Steve Pugh | Bret Blevins and Marguerite Sauvage | One-shot comic featuring a prequel story and a second story unrelated to the DCEU. |
| Serving Up Justice | 4 | September 21, 2021 – January 27, 2022 | Amanda Diebert | Cat Staggs | Promotional digital comic from DirecTV. |
| Black Adam – The Justice Society Files | 4 | July 5, 2022 – October 4, 2022 | Cavan Scott and Bryan Q. Miller | Eaton, Sanapo, Mercer, Merino, Santucci, Prianto, Carey, Kalisz, Atiyeh and Arreola. Covers by Kaare | Prelude comics to Black Adam feature film. |
| The Flash: The Fastest Man Alive | 3 | September 13, 2022 – November 8, 2022 | Kenny Porter | Ricardo López Ortiz, Juan Ferreyra and Jason Howard | Prelude comics to The Flash feature film. |
| Shazam! Fury of the Gods Special: Shazamily Matters | 1 | February 28, 2023 | Zachary Levi, D.J. Cotrona, Colleen Doran, Faithe Herman, Amanda Heibert, Tim Seeley, David F. Sandberg, Scott Kolins, Ross Butler, Josh Trujillo, Grace Caroline Currey, Adam Brody, Kenny Porter and Henry Gayden | Freddie Williams II, Erica Henderson, Jorge Corona, Scott Kolins, Andrew Drilon, Damian Fulton, Mike Norton and Scott Godlewski | Tie-in comic to Shazam! Fury of the Gods feature film. |
| Shazam! Thundercrack | 1 | March 1, 2023 | Yehudi Mercado | Yehudi Mercado | A middle-grade graphic novel set in the continuity of the two Shazam films. |
| Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom Special | 1 | October 31, 2023 | Tim Seeley, Joey Esposito, Ethan Sacks, Rafael Lopez, | Miguel Mendonca, Ray-Anthony Height, Scot Eaton, Norm Rapmund, Tony Avina, Andrew Dalhouse, Eren Angiolini | Movie tie in consisting of three original stories set within the canon of the DCEU |

### Video games

| Title | Release date(s) | Publisher(s) | Notes |
| - | - | - | - |
| Man of Steel | June 14, 2013 | Warner Bros. International Enterprises | |
| Kellogg's Man of Steel | April 19, 2013 | Catapult Marketing | |
| Batman vs Superman – Who Will Win? | March 16, 2016 | Warner Bros. International Enterprises | Endless runner |
| Suicide Squad: Special Ops | July 19, 2016 | Warner Bros. International Enterprises | First-person shooter |
| Wonder Woman: Rise of the Warrior | May 23, 2017 | Warner Bros. International Enterprises | Endless runner |
| Justice League VR: The Complete Experience | December 5, 2017 | Warner Bros. International Enterprises | Virtual reality |

## Reboot

In January 2023, Gunn and Safran announced the initial ten installments for the DC Universe, which make up a portion of the slate subtitled "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters". They included the films Superman: Legacy (2025), The Authority, The Brave and the Bold, Supergirl: Woman of Tomorrow and Swamp Thing, as well as the television series Waller, Creature Commandos, Lanterns, Paradise Lost, and Booster Gold. The duo were open to DCEU actors such as Miller, Gadot, Momoa and Levi reprising their respective roles, though Gunn clarified that Superman: Legacy would serve as the start of the new continuity, with the DCU being able to change events from the DCEU, with the DCEU properties serving "like a rough memory of what happens in the DCU". The Flash film would be used to reset some aspects of the universe heading into the DCU. In October 2023, Variety reported that that no cast members from Man of Steel, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, or Justice League would reprise their roles in the DCU.

